# Response to Blumenstock 
Ignat Miagkov

January 27


The promises brought about by big data are increasingly beneficial: humanitarian aid and financial lending can be more easily dispersed by analyzing cell phone usage or satellite images. More efficient algorithms are created every year, and can be increasingly accurate at analyzing satellite imaging, allowing for quicker human development in impoverished regions of the world. However, with the rich having access to such data, it is quite common that the richer get richer, while the poorer get taken advantage off and continue to sink deeper into poverty. Such concept is common with "payday" loans, as the poor are unaware of high interest rates on short-term loans, falling into debt traps. Additionally, algorithms created to help those in need have not been proven accurate for future issues. Once the people find out that their personal decisions are used to make long-term decisions for the region, people might try to deceive the algorithm to gain some benefits. Bias is also ever present, as the most disadvantaged people are usually the least-represented in the use of big data. Some of the prerequisites to be included in such data sets are not met by the poorest in the world, such as the use of a cell phone. Finally, a lack of regulation over the collection of data may result in malpractice, and further exploitation of the world's poorest. The United States Supreme Court is attempting to crack down on malpractices, but currently no large overarching organization exists to manage the use of big data. The recent Facebook data harvesting is a crucial example of such concept: large corporation have taken advantage of the data they collected, making the rich even richer while not giving many supposed benefits to the poor that come with the ability to analyze such data. Some solutions proposed by Blumenstock include customization and validation of data. New methods of analysis should not replace the old, but rather, work in conjunction with one another. Big data gathering should also be more customizable for the needs of a region: Facebook's facial recognition algorithm might not be useful in an impoverished region of the world, but tools from said algorithm can be used to create other solutions. Finally, big data provides should collaborate to use their data as one big platform to empower those in need, not try to outhunt each other. Blumenstock argues in the final paragraph, that big data can deeply shape international human development, if used correctly. As stated, many "silver bullets" have missed their mark in the past, but it is not too late to correct those issues. If our ability to analyze big data are used well in corroboration with each other, human development in impoverished regions of the world should skyrocket. We have the tools, now it is time to learn and master them efficiently.


The overlap of data science and human development is indeed a very tough "balancing act" to manage. Collecting personal data can feel like an overarching government entity having full control over the population. This is where the line between "good intent" and bad intent comes into play. It is very important for big data harvesters and analyzers to be transparent about what they are doing. For big data to be beneficial to the growth of human development in impoverished areas, corporations must openly be using the data for good uses, not just to make themselves richer. In the end, it is very important that big data is used for beneficial intent for the overall population, rather than just making a couple rich people even more powerful and richer. To some extent, it might be morally wrong to collect personal data, but if used properly, should be acceptable. It is essential to recognize when the line of "good intent" is crossed: for human development to take advantage of big data, corporations should keep in mind how many lives there are at stake with the data that is being used.
